Explaining the design decisions behind roguelikes seems to be all the
rage, nowadays. So here, I'm trying to explain my thoughts behind
NetHack and NetHack 4.


Flexibility
===========

In most roguelikes, this is a minor or irrelevant design goal.
(Brogue, for instance, is an awesome roguelike, but is intentionally
designed to be inflexible; the skill in that game is adapting your
character build to the resources you find. That doesn't make it a bad
game; it just makes it a very un-NetHack-like game.)  By flexibility,
what I mean is: if you want to be able to do something, you should be
able to do it.  NetHack is, and always has been, excellent in this
regard; people have thought up interesting new ways to play the game
which were not really envisaged by the developers.  (Unlike some
roguelikes, NetHack's classes are really just starting points, and
there are probably too many of them as it is; the issue is that
removing or merging any would cause an uproar.)

As such, in order to accommodate everyone, the game needs to be rather
easy for experienced players to play without restrictions, so that
playing *with* restrictions (of their choice) is an achievable goal.
This is not really a problem; sometimes people just want to breeze
through the game and that's perfectly reasonable, sometimes people
want a real challenge, and they can do that in whatever way they find
most fun.  (The game tracks some "conducts" in order to provide a
starting point for this.  They fall into three main categories:
avoiding specific powerful strategies (polyselfless, puddingfarmless,
Elberethless); playing with resources limited either in general
(wishless, polyitemless) or with specific limitations (artiwishless,
illiterate, vegan/vegetarian, atheist); and challenge runs that
heavily alter the normal play of the game (pacifist, foodless,
permablind, permahallu).)  This is the source of NetHack's
replayability after ascension; the flexibility given to the player
makes it possible to improvise solutions to all sorts of problems that
might not have come up before.  Even with simple unrestricted play,
problems frequently come up that may never have come up before, and
require improvised solutions.  This is something that I'd like to
encourage more of, but it's very hard to balance the game to
accomplish that, and I'm erring on the side of not frustrating
players.

I'd also like to make a direct argument in favour of choices, even
when some of them are usually going to be bad ideas.  Although NetHack
tries hard to make sure that no course of action is going to be 100%
useless (if only due to the presence of unique-deaths competitions
where people try to come up with the most creative suicides of
characters that they can), something that's 99% useless is perfectly
OK to put in the game.  There are multiple reasons for this: for
people who prefer to play unspoiled, there's the joy of discovery in
working out which options are best, and for spoiled players, sometimes
that 1% is going to come up, and the game's enhanced by the ability to
use unusual solutions to unusual problems.  If the best solution to
any problem is always an intended solution designed into the game by
the developers, the game becomes an issue of memorisation, rather than
creativity.

The converse is also true; if there's a choice that's 99% or even 100%
of the time correct, it doesn't detract that much from the game.  And
it probably isn't going to be made in 99% of games, because the player
is going to have a goal at reaching a point in the game in which they
can make it (and some players are going to die first); it's serving as
an important milestone for those who do that gives a sense of
accomplishment (and psychologically, helps cut down on boredom and
the feeling of repetitiveness).  Also, such choices cannot really be
eliminated without detracting from the game; forcing the player to
take them would eliminate obvious challenge runs (just make the bad
choice at that point), and there's probably *someone* who will try the
run and have fun doing so; and nerfing them will make the game more
difficult and usually not solve the underlying problem (players will
just move to the next-best choice instead, then you'll nerf that one
too, etc etc). It is important, however, to cut down on newbie traps;
if a choice is usually wrong, either it should be obviously usually
wrong, or the game should warn people who try to take it.

Finally, to allow this flexibility, the player needs to be able to
have a meaningful influence over the development of their character.
This is why items like wands of wishing exist. Also, why it's
important that the ability to start-scum characters exist, but due to
the interface and grindiness issues of that, I'm looking to replace
that with some other mechanism that gives the same choices but in a
less boring to use way.  It's also why different dungeon branches have
notably different loot; players who want something in particular
should be able to take steps to increase their chance of getting it.
Failing to do this is quite commonly observed in roguelikes; it leads
to a game where the player has no incentive to go in any direction but
the one with the easiest enemies at that point in the game, and as
such, the choice is mostly a false one.


Interface
=========

There are definitely games whose interest comes from the difficulty of
instructing your character precisely in real-time (imagine bullet-hell
shooters, for instance).  However, games tend to be most fun when they
focus on one particular sort of difficulty, rather than making you do
multiple unrelated things at the same time; puzzling your way out of a
difficult combat is made less fun, rather than more, by having to
constantly check for typos as well.  As such, in NetHack 4, there's a
strong focus on trying to make sure that what the character does is
what the player wants them to do.  For instance, apparently suicidal
actions require confirmation before the character actually does them
(with a prefix, not the easily typoed y/n, in cases where the player
might be typing movement commands at the time), although the character
*is* allowed to perform them because sometimes they might be
important.  Likewise, monsters and items whose main interest came from
interface issues have been altered to provide an interface-independent
effect (with floating eyes becoming mobile obstacles that can't be
meleed, and scrolls of amnesia draining skills rather than map
memory).

I also try to ensure that information the player needs is readily
available, to save time and effort repeatedly asking for it.  Almost
all monsters have different letter/colour/underscore combinations; the
status bar is intentionally mostly grey, with colour for the HP and Pw
bars (so that you can easily check your health status out of the
corner of your eye); background colours show the remembered locations
of traps and stairs, and the attitude of monsters.  As such, the need
to farlook things should be very low for someone experienced at the
game.

There are also interface niceties like travel and autoexplore;
however, these are implemented without compromising the corresponding
gameplay, so it may often be the case that manual play is better than
using the automated commands.  It's better to make something like
exploration interesting (with nontrivial decisions about which order
to clear rooms in, and trade-offs between waiting to heal and pushing
on immediately), than eliminate it from the game altogether and tell
people to simply tap a key in order to skip past it.  The skill in
something like exploration isn't currently working as well as it could
be, but it's more interesting to try to improve it than just to give
up and abandon it to just another task that can be ignored and left to
the AI.


Balance
=======

I've already covered why NetHack has to be somewhat easy for
experienced players.  This isn't a balance issue in its own right;
there are still plenty of ways to tell players apart, and for a game
where people can spend hours or days (or years) on a character, win
rate for non-challenge games is an uninteresting and reasonably un-fun
metric.  For inexperienced players, this is even more important; you
can learn to play a roguelike by dying repeatedly to every letter of
the alphabet, but that means going through the early game again and
again and again and again, getting slightly further each time.  And
with a game with the scope of NetHack, that's going to lead to
frustration and boredom while the player's simply trying to learn the
game, which would make it very fun unspoiled.

The solution is to make it easy to back out when in trouble, at the
cost of resources so that the game still retains tension, and also to
avoid eliminating strategy from the game (you still have to be
prepared, in order to be able to back out, and you're still only going
to be able to try a difficult section every now and again).  One
possibility would be to make it very easy to run away, but having a
standard solution to everything difficult is not particularly fun (and
additionally, being able to easily run away from a problem often means
that you end up never having to face it at all, so you miss the fun of
coming back and solving it later).  Instead, NetHack has a range of
viable escapes, ranging from full-heals to teleports to levports to
branchports to digging through the floor to life-saving to Elbereth
(which is fine in concept, but which currently tends to lead to tedium
because it's simply far too powerful and spammable).  As such, a
player exploring an area they've never been to before can have
multiple tries until they finally figure it out, and yet are never
completely out of danger, because they're still losing resources
unless they press onwards.

This also means that it's OK if the player can somehow become
invincible or effectively invincible; it's a fun goal for some
players.  However, doing that should take more effort than simply just
winning the game; and it should also happen reasonably close to the
end of the game.  (The game can be counted as won when it happens; you
don't want people to expend so much effort into going through the
motions to actually *win* from there.)  This goal is harder than it
might seem; some players of older versions got infinite stats using a
bug, and they still died sometimes (and more frequently still, failed
whatever challenge goal they were aiming for).  It probably isn't
completely impossible, though.

Another balance issue is that of grinding; some players actually enjoy
it, somehow (and I don't want to deny them their "fun"), but it's for
the best if it never becomes the best strategy, and if the game never
encourages players to do it.  This is why freshly generated levels
have more items than cleared levels, why monsters get more powerful
throughout the game even if you camp dlvl 1 (and you're probably going
to starve if you do that, anyway), and why farming gives diminishing
or even negative returns on your score.  Likewise, shopkeepers have
only limited gold, and pay sufficiently small amounts for common items
like daggers that the gold you'd get is not even worth the time you
take to collect them.  (And it's why gold drops off in usefulness past
the early game.)

It's also OK if not all races or classes or play-styles are equal.
(In fact, it would be rather surprising if they were.)  At the moment,
pure melee is probably the best strategy (at least one top player will
make a pure melee build even with wizards), but that doesn't matter;
players are still going to play in other ways, such as spellcasting or
ranged combat or riding, purely because that's what they find fun (and
aren't games about fun)?  Again, flexibility is important; if the game
were hard enough that perfect play were required to win, then everyone
would be forced into the best strategy, which would take away a lot of
choice from the game.  With slack in the system, even underpowered
characters have a real chance at being made viable, and this adds
replayability as well as personalisation to the game.

Finally, I try to give meaningful strategic decisions about where to
go and what to do next, and what sort of goals to focus on.  This is
why things like intrinsics and ascension kit items exist; they give
the player something to aim for throughout the whole of the early and
mid-game (whilst none of them, apart from the invocation items, are
completely necessary, to play into the flexibility goal), and they're
valuable enough that they encourage the player to take risks to get
them.  (This is the main purpose of enemies that are very dangerous
missing a certain intrinsic/extrinsic but easy if you have it, such as
Mordor orcs and energy vortices; the implementation here could do with
improvements, but the goal is important enough that even a bad method
of achieving it adds to the game.)  It's interesting to note that
Gehennom currently fails very badly at this goal, and it's one of the
main reasons why it's the least fun part of the game (there are a few
others).  I'm looking for improvements there, but it serves as a
striking example of why this philosophy is important.


Need (or lack of need) for spoilers
===================================

There's a lot to discover in NetHack; even after playing it for years,
and reading all the spoilers you can find, there's *still* going to be
things about the game that you don't know, and can surprise you.  (And
this is true even of 3.4.3, which hasn't changed for years; even
nowadays in 2012, new things about it are discovered from time to
time.)  As such, I try to allow for unspoiled play.  NetHack 4
intentionally spoils information that is hard to remember or discover
(the relative strength of weapons, the Invocation sequence), or that
is grindy and un-fun to find out (which corpses are edible and which
will kill you), while leaving other things there to be discovered;
this is why the descriptions of items list their most obvious effect,
rather than an exhaustive list of everything you can do with that item
(as has been seen in some Angband variants, for instance; it's
interesting to note that such variants are often described as having
"NetHack envy").  The flexibility in the game also allows for
unspoiled play to have a decent chance of survival even when it makes
mistakes; it works like just another challenge goal.  (Note that this
doesn't mean that I expect unspoiled players to win at all quickly;
it's OK if it takes months or years of effort to win unspoiled.)

However, although some players love the joy of discovery, many don't;
and just as the game is designed to be fun unspoiled, it should be
designed to be fun spoiled too.  Even spoilers tend not to give
players a good feel for the game's strategy; knowing all the
information, but without practical dungeon experience, tends to get
players killed in interesting ways.  And players who know all the
information about the game will still have to improvise solutions from
time to time (or all the time, if they're trying a challenge run
that's never been done before); it's fun when that happens, and
they'll have all the information that they need to work out what will
happen when they do.  (This is one of the main benefits of NetHack
communities online; the knowledge of 100 people is better than the
knowledge of 1, and can lead to creative solutions when otherwise
there'd be a vague guess and a disappointing death.)


Consistency
===========

NetHack is a very large game, and there's a huge amount to remember.
As such, consistency in the way things behave in the game helps make
playing more fun by reducing the amount of arbitrary lists you have to
memorise.  This is why making NetHack match real life or common
fantasy tropes when possible is useful; you probably already know what
elves are like, for instance, and if there's something that an item
"should" be able to do, it probably can.  (A fun experiment: find
someone who doesn't play NetHack, describe a problem you're having in
the game, ask them to suggest a solution.  Over half the time, it's
going to be something that is actually possible in the game, although
you may not have the items for it.)  Likewise, the occasional bad pun
in the operation of an item is there both for the groans when it's
noticed, and because someone who discovers it is unlikely to forget it
from then on.
